A High School Senior's Guide on How to Craft a College Portfolio
STUDENT LIFE
 about 24 hours ago

 BY CALEB MARGOLIS
 0

It is no secret that the college application process is not a one-way street. Every teenager's experiences, interests, and personalities are different, and so are each part of their applications. While there are multiple ways one can construct their college "portfolio," there are specific strategies and/or techniques that can increase one's chance of getting into the college or university of one's choice.

At the foundation of the college application exists one fundamental goal that each student should strive for: ensuring that your application reviewer learns as much about you as possible. If a random person can learn about your interests, motivations, intelligence, and personality when reading through your application, you have successfully formed the optimal college portfolio.

On a basic level, colleges and universities want to bring students they know will succeed in the confines of their educational system. When proceeding through this article, you will learn some essential characteristics that will boost the "appearance" of your college portfolio.


Image Credit: Shubham Sharan from Unsplash

Choosing your High School Classes
When choosing your high school classes, it's imperative that you make decisions that are adventurous, focused, and driven. As you embark on your high school journey with the intended goal of making it to college, being adventurous by taking a diverse range of topics of classes will help you determine your "likes" and "dislikes" in education. In reviewing your classes and grades, colleges and universities like to see this curiosity so that they know you would be a well-rounded student if you were to be at their institution.

While you should take a diverse range of classes, colleges, and universities also like to see students that are focused, or in other words, know what they want to do with their life. This does not mean you have to have your entire life planned out, but you should understand what type of classes you enjoy and, at most, two careers you would enjoy partaking in.

One of the most important things to do, especially if you want to be recognized by a college or university, is be driven and challenge yourself in the realm of academia, despite strongly recommending not taking every AP or IB level class available, colleges and universities like to admit students who have challenged themselves in their time at high school. By staying adventurous in your class selections, you can dive into becoming more focused on who and what you want to be, inspiring drive toward your goals, making you an even more appealing candidate for colleges and universities who want to produce successful and achieving students.

On a more statistical level, every student planning on attending a four-year college should strive for a 2.0 GPA. However, depending on the acceptance rate of the college you're planning on attending, your GPA "target" should change accordingly; for example, if you are aiming for a college or university with an acceptance rate less than 60% you shoot for a 3.5 GPA.

However, it is important to keep in mind that different high schools tend to calculate GPA differently, and colleges and universities know this. In other words, your grades, GPA, and classes are all considered when the admission staff reviews your application. Thus, your value as a student is not based solely on whether or not you got all A's or took all AP and IB classes; it is also based on whether you took advantage of all of the opportunities given to you: "asking the most of it."


Image Credit: JESHOOTS from Unsplash

The Complexity of SAT and ACT Scores
The priority of standardized testing scores such as the SAT and/or ACT is uneven, varying depending on each applicant's skills and the college or university to which they are applying. As of 2023, more than 80% of four-year colleges and universities do not require or consider standardized test scores. Thus, the necessity of scoring high on standardized tests is beginning to fade.

That being said, if you score strongly on the SAT or ACT or your scores fit into the average scores of the college or university you are applying to, then the score still serves as a benefit. The advantage of standardized scores is that they can help your applicant reader gauge or compare your abilities as a student to the other, especially if you are coming from a high school they have not admitted students from.

Therefore, it's important to note that, as of now, the SAT and ACT aren't considered the "end all be all "when it comes to your application. Instead of focusing all your time and energy on achieving a high standardized test score, create a strong balance between your school work and your extracurriculars; simply score the best you can.


Image Credit: Markus Spiske from Unsplash

Extracurricular Activities
As grades, classes, and standardized test scores are common among applicants, one of the best ways to set yourself apart is through extracurricular activities. While your work in the classroom shows your capability in academia, your extracurriculars can illuminate the best parts of you. When choosing extracurriculars, you should be mindful of participating in activities that reflect your interests, your personality, your capacity as a person, as well as your willingness to step outside of your comfort zone (most colleges and universities don't "jump" toward students who are too narrow-minded).

That being said, stay cautious of participating in too many extracurriculars. Your time is limited, and you want to keep an equal balance between your school work, extracurriculars, and other important aspects of your life (like getting enough sleep every night).

According to the Oxford Dictionary, extracurricular is defined as: "not on the normal or core curriculum; undertaken in addition to the principal course of study." This means an extracurricular activity is not just a club or program at school but is any activity outside of the school's educational track. These activities may consist of academic clubs, including honor societies like the National Honors Society; athletics; any form of community service; the arts, including artwork, music, theater, etc.; work experience (any activity in which you are paid by a legitimate institution, not just doing chores); participating in student exchange programs; participating in clubs consisting of technology usage, like robotics; and volunteering.

One mistake students in high school make is joining an extracurricular activity to simply say they did it, but if they took more time to apply themselves, they could get more "more bang for their buck." Buck, in this case, is equivalent to time. Participating in extracurriculars is a benefit to your application already; however, holding an officer or leadership position in an extracurricular can greatly help you get recognized by a college or an institution.

Being a leader in these extracurriculars shows your responsibility and your capability to aid others and that people trust you to uphold their values, making you a capable candidate for any college or university you apply to. Colleges and Universities all want to produce the best next generation of people across various careers; by showing that you are a leader, you also show your capacity to achieve the goal that the college or university has already set for you.

Extra Tips for Increasing Your Chances of Admission
Keeping Documentation
As your experiences will be vast across your high school experience, typically a four-year or longer endeavor, it'simperative that you keep note of or hold documentation for your participation in activities and achievements. Documentation should include sufficient information capable of answering a few questions: "What was done? Where was it done?

When was it done? Why was it done? And what was achieved?" By holding onto this information, when you finally put together your college application, it will be far easier to reminisce about past experiences and fully articulate what you have done as a person that makes you qualified to attend the college and university of your choice.

X-Factor
Having an x-factor is a great way to set yourself apart from other college applicants after your high school career, aside from extracurriculars. This "X-Factor" is an experience and/or self-run activity outside of traditional scholastic and extracurricular activities. These x-factors are composed solely of your creativity based on your current interests, some of which may include starting a small business or writing a novel. The goal and intention is to convey even further to your "admitters" your character/personality, along with some of your passions.

Conclusion
For everyone embarking on the college application process, I want to note that the experience is not straightforward, and you will go through many ups and downs throughout the year. However, it is not the college or university you get into that defines you but the work you have done throughout your life. If you take your experiences, your interests, and your passions to your college and university, no matter where it may be, you will find success and obtain the goals you deeply desire. Don't lose sight of your hard work, and continue to strive for improvement.