The Influence of New Work Environments: the Bonds and Skills We Build
Nallely Mejia, Staff
April 10, 2024
Chik-Fil-A+employees+Front+of+House+Supervisor%2C+Mauro+Monroy%2C+and+Back+of+House+Supervisor%2C+Jesus+Perez%2C+showing+off+their+beautiful+smiles.
Nallely Mejia
Chik-Fil-A employees Front of House Supervisor, Mauro Monroy, and Back of House Supervisor, Jesus Perez, showing off their beautiful smiles.
When students enter a new work environment for the first time, they come across new people they know nothing about. But as time passes, they build strong relationships with the people around them. 


Nicholas Matusoff and Supervisor, Mauro Monroy, filling up the room with laughter and smiles. (Nallely Mejia)
It is important to provide everyone with comfort and support, so with that, the well-being of workers is most important. This will bring strong connections to those who are starting their first job.

The recognition we receive from our employers and coworkers brings a feeling of satisfaction and a sense of being valued. When working in an environment that motivates us to do our best, our actions and efforts will be seen. As it is most important when work environments do so, it allows us to know we matter to those around us.

As many companies bring attention to the community, Chick-fil-A,  a fast food restaurant that specializes in selling original chicken sandwiches,  is known to have been one of the strongest bonding work environments. Not only that, but they also commit to a workplace culture where everyone is treated with honor, dignity, and respect. They believe that in order for their success, a strong and caring culture is essential, along with offering fulfilling careers for their staff. 

These views are shared by Jennifer Vasquez, who has been with the Chick-fil-A company for 2 years. She states how she finds the environment to bring a knowledge of being valued and a sense of fulfillment while working there. “The constant appreciation–constant follow up on certain things that I do within work, outside of work, they always try to keep up, so to me I feel appreciated, and feel like they’re connected with what I’m doing,” said Vasquez, a Chick-Fil-A trainer.

A future trainer from Chick-fil-A, Felicia Esquivel, has felt the benefits of working with the company. “When they had asked me to move up a position, I felt like they really cared about me. To me, it made me realize they want to see me succeed,” said Esquivel. 


Hannah Mendenhall preparing to greet customers with a smile and dedication. (Nallely Mejia)
Chick-fil-A isn’t the only company that makes their employees feel valued; Chip Cookies also does this. Chip Cookies, a cookie bakery with rotating flavors, gives their employees a sense of control over their work and a work environment that radically increases how much motivation they bring to their job.

Hannah Mendenhall, an employee at Chip Cookies; said, “My job has made me feel valued as a person in the way where my bosses and my coworkers really appreciate me and always make it known how good I’m doing. I feel like when I receive tips, it really makes me feel appreciated too.”

Young teens learn new life skills when they enter the workforce, which will help them later in life. Jobs can teach the value of teamwork and the importance of open-mindedness. Working to develop these strengths allows teens to find pride and enjoyment in their work, setting their lives for success.

Not only will this help employees succeed in life, but it will also help develop time management skills. Those who deal with deadline pressures and lengthy to-do lists are more likely to develop personal strategies that make them more efficient. It allows them to determine what’s important, and manage correspondence in a timely manner and shows them the patience that is needed with customers or other coworkers.

For Vasquez, working in an environment,— such as Chick-fil-A —has taught her many things. “I have learned to network and help improve my communication skills. My interpersonal skills have improved a lot while working here too, but most importantly, my customer service has been one of the most important things to improve,” said Vasquez.

“Working here has definitely taught me a lot, especially when it comes to dealing and helping out with the customers. It can be difficult trying to help them out, but this job has taught me a lot of patience and taught me how to manage my time and balance out both work and school,” said Esquivel.

While work helps prepare us for the future, it also helps to bond with others. Creating these bonds makes the environment a place for smiles and laughter. Having a positive environment leaves room for creating memories and an enjoyable experience while doing tasks at work.


Chick-Fil-A employee, Ethan Berardi and supervisor, Jose Barrera, creating smiles and fond memories as they enjoy their time at work. (Nallely Mejia)
Not only is it important to connect with the job itself, but connecting with coworkers plays an important role in success. “I love this job because of the coworkers because — let’s say I’m having a bad day, they will always find a way to cheer me up, even if it’s not their intention. They always find a way to make me smile in times when I need it,” said Esquivel.

As we grow our strengths and learn new life skills, we make new memories, create smiles, and impact the way we make others feel. The validation and recognition we receive impact the way we work and perform, so as we do our best to show our efforts, we find a path to succeeding. Not only do we learn life skills from entering our first job, but we learn to build a family, make memories, and find a sense of home with those around us.