Student Debt But No Degree: Millions of Americans Struggle in Limbo
“Why am I in so much debt for nothing?”


This story is published as part of Teen Vogue’s 2022 Economic Security Project fellowship.

“I still remember the day that I found out I was going to college,” Juan Ramiro tells Teen Vogue, recalling the scholarship award that tipped the scales for him. “When the email came in, I felt like I had won the lottery.”

Ramiro was sitting on the curb outside of his apartment complex with his iPod Touch in hand. The apartment he lived in with his mom and two siblings — all of whom were undocumented at the time — didn’t have internet access, so he’d been checking his email for news using the Wi-Fi signal from the diner next door. Thankfully, the University of Kansas’s Pell Advantage program was already covering his tuition. The $20,000 scholarship would provide an additional $5,000 per year in financial support — surely enough to cover whatever extra costs there might be, he remembers thinking.

TRENDING NOW

Stray Kids Play "I Dare You"


But the scholarship’s annual allotment wasn’t actually enough to cover his required on-campus housing, much less the required meal plan, along with academic books and living expenses. Ramiro had to take out loans to cover costs. Things took a sudden turn during his last year of school, when former president Donald Trump dramatically expanded the country’s deportation guidelines, arresting hundreds of undocumented migrants in a matter of weeks. As the only U.S. citizen in his family, it became Ramiro’s responsibility to help his mother safely return to Mexico on her own terms, and then become the family’s main breadwinner when he returned to the U.S.

“I had my siblings, who were also undocumented in the U.S., still at risk,” Ramiro explains, “so maintaining my job and the steady income with it became my main priority. My undergraduate courses became collateral damage. I dropped out because my mental health began to decline very quickly. I was just trying to keep it together. My family was depending on me, so I dropped out, and I was like, ‘Okay, well, I just have to keep this job.’”

The 27-year-old says he now owes around $29,000 in student loans and has “nothing to show” for his years in college — aside from “a deep sense of shame for not having completed it” as the first person in his family to make the attempt.

An estimated 38.6% of the 43 million student debtors in the United States — roughly 16.6 million people — have debt but no degree six years after first entering college, according to National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) data analyzed by the Hope Center’s Mark Huelsman. Much of the public debate around student debt cancellation focuses on competing narratives about who would most benefit from such a policy: a multiracial, multigenerational population of working-class graduates, or an already wealthy, affluent group of middle-to-upper-class young professionals? In both instances, a completed degree is assumed.

And yet, the millions of debtors with tens of thousands in outstanding loans, but without the diploma that (supposedly) statistically ensures an upwardly mobile life — what about them?

Former Wheaton College student Kristen Seadale currently owes around $20,000 in student loans after leaving the Massachusetts school last October. Now working an hourly job she loves — and didn’t need a degree to get — the 23-year-old is open about wishing she’d gone to community college instead. Her outstanding debt is both a persistent worry, she says, and also too stressful to think about.

“I haven’t dealt with it at all; I’m terrified,” Seadale says. “I work in a kitchen. I love my job, but I work in a kitchen. I’m not in a really professional space where I’m making $30 an hour or something like that. I don’t have a salary. I work hourly and I don’t know what I’m gonna do. I just…I feel very lucky that I don’t have as much debt as other people.”

College started off well for Seadale, but after going on academic suspension for a period of time, she returned to a social environment on campus that left her feeling isolated. Her friend group had graduated the year prior. She didn’t like her classes and struggled with her grades. Before long, Seadale developed a drinking problem. After blacking out one night, she tells Teen Vogue, “the next thing I knew, I was on the phone with my mother telling her I wanted to kill myself.”

Having left school to recover, Seadale says she’s now in a much better place, with friends she loves, a job she loves, and a life she enjoys. Seadale joins the 64% of nongraduates who say they left college because of a mental health reason, according to a 2012 survey by the National Alliance on Mental Illness. Dropping out of Wheaton was quite literally good for Seadale’s health, yet, like Ramiro, she still feels a sense of shame for leaving school.

Feelings of shame surface with nearly every person Teen Vogue spoke with for this story, regardless of their reasons for dropping out. The sources of the shame are varied and layered; personal disappointment after a derailed degree runs headlong into all the classist things we’re socialized to presume about the character, work ethic, and value of people without a college degree versus those who’ve secured one. Some report feeling out-of-place among their degreed friend group. Others say they hide that they dropped out from friends and colleagues. Ramiro tells Teen Vogue that he participated in his college graduation to keep up appearances despite not getting his degree, and still has photos from the ceremony. Seadale says her mom is supportive, but she still worries that her mom might feel embarrassed that her daughter works in a kitchen.

Originally from San Diego, 22-year-old Elisa chose to attend University of California Santa Cruz to get out of their hometown. As a low-income student, Elisa secured some financial aid but had to take out loans to cover the rest. To cover books and other school expenses, they also worked full-time at a fast-food restaurant. They ate at work to save money because the school-provided meal plan didn’t cover weekends.

“Juggling school with a full-time job in food service was a lot to handle, especially since most of the customers were students,” says Elisa, who asked Teen Vogue not to use their last name. “I would see people my age just hanging out and doing whatever they wanted to — meanwhile, I was stuck at work eight hours a day on a Monday night after class, knowing that I have to do my homework on my breaks [and] try to finish as much as I could. It was just a lot on my mental [plate], and not having that support system of a family [nearby] or even like really good friends just kind of ate away at that. Oftentimes I just felt like I was alone and that I couldn’t do it. It was just a lot to handle for me.”

After a bout of “really deep depression,” an ADHD diagnosis, and growing academic pressure, Elisa made the choice to leave school before their junior year, both for their own well-being and to stop them from accruing even more debt on a college experience that hadn’t gone as planned. Since leaving school with around $10,000 in debt, Elisa has worked mostly hourly jobs. When asked about the possibility of making monthly loan payments once the Biden administration ends the student loan moratorium, Elisa says they “don’t work enough to even think that far [ahead].”

“I won’t lie, it makes me feel a bit bad about myself because it feels like time wasted,” they add. “Instead of going to school, I could have just been working that entire time. I could have made money instead of losing it.”

“One thing that perturbs me is the fact that I have paid so much already and I have come this far — why am I in so much debt for nothing?” says 24-year-old Justice Shiller, who has $196,000 in student loans. She left school during the pandemic, explaining that the switch to online classes made learning difficult. “Do I want to continue to go into a lot more debt for a piece of paper? If this was 20 years ago, where a degree held a lot more value than it does today, then yes. But you don’t need a degree to be successful.”

It’s difficult to find definitive data on non-graduating debt holders, but another useful set of statistics to look at is graduation rates. For four-year institutions, the average national graduation rate sits at 63%. According to data from the NCES, just 4 in 10 Black students and just under 4 in 10 American Indian/Alaskan Native students graduate from four-year universities within six years, compared to 64% of white students and 74% of Asian students. Given those numbers, it’s also notable, then, that 44% of students at public universities, 58% at private nonprofit universities, and 70% at private for-profit universities take out student loans to attend four-year institutions, according to the NCES. Non-graduating debt holders rest at the nexus of those figures, making up a portion of overall student borrowers that are often under-discussed.

“At one point, I stopped [making loan payments] because, like, I can’t afford this. There’s no way I could afford all this money for an education that I didn’t even know I didn’t want [and] wasn’t ready for,” says Randy Heflin Jr., who left Arizona State University after five years. The 29-year-old has $50,000 of student debt and no degree from a university experience he says he would do entirely differently.

“Now I know what I want to do, or at least I have an idea of the things I’m interested in,” he says. “I just picked up [that] communications major because they make money, and then I ended up hating it. I was like, Oh, okay, well now I’m f-cked. I’m still paying for it. I’m paying for my mistake that I didn’t know what I wanted to do.”

Teen Vogue asked respondents if they regretted going to college in the first place. Of those asked, none of them did. A few consider going back to finish their degree. Others aren’t convinced it’d be worth it. The diversity of perspectives reads like a casual survey of the diversity of life’s choices, if not for the tens of thousands of debt tied to their economic futures.

“I was coming in as a very decorated high school graduate with national scholarships that I accrued to not get loans, and I still had to take out loans,” Ramiro says. “And I still defaulted on them and didn’t graduate. So, if this is the scenario with someone that tries to do the best that they can to be the model student, and yet they themselves get to this point — imagine those folks that had an even tougher upbringing that didn’t get a chance or didn’t have exposure to scholarships. And they get to college and they get three times the loan debt that I have. That becomes overwhelming.”