INDEPENDENT STUDIES
June 18, 2024
By Niev BRONZE, Scarsdale, New York

Independent studies can save American education.


What is an independent study? An independent study is a class you can take at school that gives you credit. You study a topic that you choose deeply and you work with a teacher to set goals. The student checks in with the teacher and completes assignments and projects. Some examples include: How Hotels Create Brand Harmony; a Zebrafish Model of Autism; Polycystic Ovary Syndrome: Insulin Resistance, Infertility, and Treatment. 


Independent studies foster curiosity, creativity, passion, and excitement. They also fight the boredom that is endemic in high schools. According to US News, “Research suggests that students are bored from a third to half the time they spend in school – significantly more than at home. And that can have serious consequences: One survey of high school dropouts found that almost half reported giving up on school because of boredom.” For every student that drops out, more students check out. Independent Studies address this issue by helping students find their passion. 


Independent studies encourage true learning based on interests rather than traditional models that ignore passion. According to the U.S. Department of Education, “Independent Study (IS) is a highly encouraged differentiation technique by educators of the gifted that offers student autonomy and challenge in the learning process. Betts (2004) regarded independent study as the highest level of learning because it connects the interests and readiness level of the individual student to essential critical thinking skills for gifted education: decision-making, investigation, problem-solving, inquiry, questioning, and reflection (Pugh, 1999).”


Independent studies are beneficial for middle schoolers just as they are for high schoolers. According to a 1990 study by Pintrich and Degroot, “…a study of middle school students demonstrated that self-regulated learning and student choice actually improved motivation and academic performance (Pintrich & DeGroot, 1990).” Despite evidence that independent study benefits both middle and high school students, most schools limit independent studies to 11th and 12th graders. 


If you are worried about college applications, don’t. Independent studies help you improve your college application indirectly, by honing skills that are vital to applications, such as reaching out to people and writing articles/essays and talking about your work. Independent studies also boost creativity and curiosity, two traits that colleges are all about.


If it’s allowed in your school, consider taking an independent study. If it’s not, work with your school’s administrators to change the policy. I’m currently working on changing my school’s policy on independent studies to include 7-12th graders, and can help you get started changing your school’s policy on independent studies. You can reach me at niev841@gmail.com.