The Best Valentine's Day Candies to Gift Your Best Friends
WELLNESS
 Wed, February 14

 BY COVE JOHNSON RABIDOUX
 2

Valentine's Day is a day of love and romance, but it can also be a time to show your appreciation for your best friends (or yourself). What better way to do that than with a delicious box of Valentine's Day candies?

Now, there are so many different types of Valentine's Day candies to choose from, so you're sure to find something that your best friend will love. Whether you're looking for something sweet, chocolatey, or fruity, there's a Valentine's Day candy out there for everyone. Continue reading for a list of the 5 best Valentine's Day candies!

Conversation Hearts
No Valentine's Day is complete without Conversation Hearts. These miniature pastel-colored candies are a perfect gift to give to your best friends or SO on Valentine's Day. Conversation Hearts are a Valentine's Day classic and for good reason.

Each heart is stamped with a positive message such as "Be Mine," "Love You," or “Friendship,” so they are sure to make anyone feel special. They are also super tasty, with a chalky texture and a sweet, sugary flavor.

Conversation Hearts are a must-have for any Valentine's Day celebration! They are delicious and come in a variety of flavors, such as cherry, grape, lemon-lime, wintergreen, and strawberry. Plus, Conversation Hearts have become so popular that you can now buy them from multiple different brands, including Sweethearts and Brach's. Overall, Conversation Hearts are a sweet and sentimental way to show your love and appreciation for your loved ones!


Image Credit: Kenny Eliason from Unsplash

Hershey's Kisses
Hershey's Kisses are the perfect candy gift to give to your friends on Valentine's Day. Not only do they have a delicious chocolate flavor, but they are also adorable and the perfect size. Hershey's Kisses are made with milk chocolate and have a smooth, creamy flavor that everyone will love.

But if your bestie doesn't like milk chocolate, Hershey's Kisses also come in flavors such as Cookies 'N Cream, Peppermint, and Birthday Cake. Plus, they are individually wrapped, making them easy to share with your friends and family. So if you're looking for the perfect candy gift to give to your friends on Valentine's Day, look no further than Hershey's Kisses.


Image Credit: slgckgc from Wikimedia Commons

Valentine's Fun Dip
I have vivid memories of being in elementary school and receiving countless sugary, pink Fun Dips when passing around valentines. But Fun Dip doesn't just have to be a childhood treat, you can enjoy it as a teen too! Fun Dip is a nostalgic candy that is fun to eat and share.

The powdery sugar and flavored sticks are a delicious combination that is sure to please any of your friends on Valentine's Day. To eat Fun Dip, you lick the stick and dip it into the powder. The powder dissolves on your tongue, creating a sweet and sour flavor. The flavors of Fun Dip vary, but some of the most popular flavors are cherry, grape, and orange. Overall, with its bright colors, delicious flavor, and fun packaging, Fun Dip is the perfect candy to give on Valentine's Day.

Pink Sweetarts
Pink Sweetarts are a delicious, chewy candy that is perfect for Valentine's Day. They are made with real fruit juice and have a sweet, tangy flavor that is sure to please. Sweetarts are also a fun and festive candy that can be used to create all sorts of creative Valentine's Day treats.

One of the best things about Sweetarts is that they are so versatile. You can eat them straight out of the bag, use them as a topping for ice cream or yogurt, or add them to cookies, cakes, and other desserts. Overall, if you are looking for a unique and thoughtful gift for your Valentine, pink Sweetarts are the perfect choice.

They are sure to put a smile on your friend's face. But you don't just have to buy the pink Sweetarts. Sweetarts come in a variety of colors and flavors, so you can choose the ones your best friend will love the most. No matter how you use them, Sweetarts are sure to make your Valentine's Day a sweet one.


Image Credit: Alexander Grey

Starbursts FaveReds
It is a popular opinion that the pink and red Starbursts are the best. Their artificial fruit flavor is sweet and delicious, and they just happen to be the traditional Valentine's Day colors. If you're wondering of a yummy treat to give your friends or significant other on Valentine's Day then Starbursts FaveReds is a fantastic choice!

Starbursts are chewy candies that are slightly sticky, but have a delicious fruity flavor that is perfect for Valentine's Day. There are many ways to enjoy Starbursts. You can eat them individually, or you make Starburst ice cream. Overall, why not embody Valentine's Day by gifting your friend FaveRed Starbursts that represent the holiday?


Image Credit: Laura Ockel from Unsplash

Everyone loves candy, so if you're looking for a way to show your best friend how much you care, don't forget about Valentine's Day candies. Candies are a great way to say "I appreciate you" without saying a word. Whether your bestie enjoys tart candies or creamy treats, you are sure to find something they will enjoy. Some extra Valentine's Day sweets are:

Chocolate Covered Strawberries
Cherry Lollipops
Red Velvet Cake Pops
Twizzlers/Red Vines
Sour Patch Kids (Valentine's Day Edition)