Summer Depression Is a Real Thing, and Here Are Some Strategies for Combating It
MENTAL HEALTH
 Wed, July 03

 BY KENNADY KERNS
 0

When feeling lonely, anxious, or depressed during the school months people often blame it on school stressors, lack of sleep and rest, and overall the overwhelming fast pace of being a teen in school.

Though school can heighten anxiety and depression for many it is not the “cause” of it. Despite this, when summertime arrives there is a conception that everything needs to be perfect. You need the perfect Instagram story at the beach and the perfect selfie with your friends at the fair.

Most of all, summer has to be a time of happiness, and depression is not “allowed” in the summertime. This is not close to the truth. Struggling with mental health can happen in any season and is valid. In this article, I am going to give you tips and tricks to take care of your mental health this summer and cope with the real challenges of summertime sadness.


Photo by Eric Rothermel on Unsplash

Routine
Summer is not very structured for many people, during the school year you can count on the school to provide that structure but when the school year ends for many of us so does a daily routine. For me, when struggling with my mental health, having a routine has always been a helpful way to cope. Sometimes being able to control your routine helps to make it feel like you have control over something when you don't feel like you have that control over your mental health.

I do recommend giving it a try this summer. Whether it is by having a summer job you enjoy to count on every day or making weekly plans with friends, a routine can be a beneficial strategy. I would start with a calendar. Some people prefer a paper calendar whereas for others a digital one will do the trick!

Social interaction
For many, when experiencing depression the idea of going out and socializing sounds daunting and overall just exhausting.

“People who feel more connected to others have lower levels of anxiety and depression (Seppala, 2023).”

This summer try not to isolate yourself from others. It helps to set a goal. Say my goal was to hang out with someone once a week, I will ensure that is incorporated into my schedule and routine. Even just reaching out to people over text or phone calls can be a less daunting way to communicate and interact with others.


Photo by Melissa Askew on Unsplash

Get outside
This year I set a goal to spend a few minutes outside a day doing nothing and just sitting there and being outside with no electronics, and no people, just silence. I attempted to do this every day. Some days it was harder than others with it snowing in the winter or me thinking of all the school work I needed to get done or just being very busy.

Now with it being summer. Try and set an amount of time you will go outside with nothing to do and just be grounded. Doing this helps to get fresh air, reflect and just take a breath in a fast-paced season.

Take the pressure off of summer
This is easier said than done, but with summertime comes pressure for many of us to have a perfect summer. Take the pressure off of it though and try to be patient with yourself and your mental health. Comparing yourself to others can be a hard thing to let go of, but letting go of comparison can help.

With social media, it helps to remember that people are only showing specific parts of their lives (most of the time the highlights), and even if someone’s summer looks perfect online that might not be the case. Try and remember that and take the pressure off of summer!

Taking care of yourself
Practice self-care this summer. Summer is a great time to practice caring for yourself and doing what you love. That could be a good book, hiking, or listening to your favorite summer playlist, practicing self-care can be a good way to cope.

Grounding
Grounding has always been a beneficial practice for me when experiencing anxiety or depression. There are several grounding practices you could put into daily practice. One of my favorite five senses for this practice is to focus first on 5 things you see, then 4 things you feel, 3 things you hear, 2 you smell, and 1 you taste!

Imagining a space where you feel calm and relaxed can also be a beneficial technique. Say you feel most at peace in a quiet forest, close your eyes and imagine that perfect forest. Think of the sounds you hear, the smells you could smell, and the things you would see.

Cleaning
Cleaning has also always been a helpful coping mechanism for me. despite it not being the most “fun” for many of us, having a clean living space can help you feel a little less overwhelmed. I recommend as exhausting as it might sound cleaning up your room or living space. this does not have to be a deep clean but simply making your bed can really make a difference.

Support
Lastly, I would like to say I am not an expert, these are strategies that have helped me but reaching out for support is also important. It could be a helpline or hotline, a trusted adult, or a counselor but reaching out to someone can be very helpful. In times of summertime anxiety or depression seek support. Along with this, many of these are a lot easier said than done and I understand it can be frustrating and take patience but you got this putting these in practice every day has helped me!