ALCOHOLA ABUSE LEADS TO VIOLENCE
November 15, 2007
By Anonymous

Did you know that alcohol is “The leading drug abused in the nation”? According to the United States department of Health and Human Resources. Many people say they can control their drinking, But when do you know when you’ve had one drink too many? The question is why people drink; there is no positive outcome what so ever. Someone will always end up hurt in the long run. Alcohol abuse leads to violence, and it must be stopped!

There is nothing wrong with drinking, but when it is abused, that’s a whole different story. When one is an alcoholic the body needs alcohol to function. No matter what others say, alcohol is a drug. Alcohol is a depressant, and it slows down your motor skills, which control the way you think, speak, move and react. Studies show that some drink from depression, and emotional distress. There must be a better solution; alcohol is not the solution to these problems.

Heavy drinking can cause or aggravate problems at home and often results in domestic violence. Children and spouses suffer the most. It doesn’t make sense why people pay to damage and hurt their body. Alcohol harms every single organ in the body. It is not fair for family members to see a loved one throw their life away to a terrible addiction. It’s up to the relatives to take action, and find a solution to cure this addiction. It is never to late for change and nothing is impossible to overcome.

Alcohol use has a huge toll on society, through automobile crashes, crime and child and spouse abuse. There are 100,000 Americans who die each year from alcohol related injuries. Take in mind that when someone is driving under the influence, and causes a car crash. There is another vehicle with a driver, who can result with fatal injuries or even death! It’s not right; it is irresponsible for a drunk driver to go behind the wheel. Again, alcohol abuse leads to someone getting hurt.

Many people say that when they drink to relieve stress. Others say “I can control my drinking.” I honestly think that someone can’t know exactly when they’ve had one drink to many. Maybe if they’re 100% disciplined, but many aren’t, so again it leads to alcohol abuse. “One more wont hurt right?” Think again. One way or the other, whether its an automobile crash, a violent outburst at home, a damaged organ. Someone is getting hurt.

It’s been said, its been proven, alcohol leads to violence. I ask for everyone to take affirmative action towards this issue. We can’t let this happen anymore. Do you really want to be the other driver who has just crashed with a drunk driver? Do you want to feel guilt because you didn’t try to help your relative cure his addiction. Yes, we say it’s never too late. But will it be too late when some one has died because of this. There is a cure; if we work together we can fight the addiction. Alcohol leads to violence and it must be stopped!