The Teen Therapy Experience: Encouragement and Tips

You’ve probably heard that therapy is for the “weak” or “broken”. Many people have been told to get over it, just don't think about it, don't worry, you’ll be fine. This might be okay for surface-level problems, but sometimes you need a bit more. According to CDC data, between 2009 and 2019, depression symptoms among teenagers increased by 40%. It is well known that all types of mental health issues have been rising over recent years. Therapy has been clinically proven to help improve symptoms of mental issues in people of all ages. Including teenagers. This is my story.

I was 10 when I first started going to therapy. As a child, I found it fun. Drawing pictures and playing. I stopped going until I was 13 when I started having a rough time mentally, that was when I found out I suffer from anxiety and OCD. After being brought up with two opposing opinions on therapy, I was very conflicted about it. After a few weeks of going, I wanted to stop, I thought it was embarrassing and I didn't want to talk about my problems. But my mom was determined to keep me going. Since then, I've learned a lot. So now I want to share it with you, so you can lessen your worry about therapy.

Find the best type of therapy for you
Therapy is a broad term for many different types of emotional aid. The most common therapy type is CBT (Cognitive Behavioural Therapy). CBT is used to help change unhelpful and unhealthy ways of thinking and is used for a wide range of different psychological problems, such as anxiety, emotional and behavioral problems, depression, phobias, and addiction. Some other common types of therapy are group therapy, art therapy, and interpersonal therapy. One type of therapy won't suit everyone, so my advice is to do your research on which type would suit you best.

2. Make a list

I found making a list in my notes app with topics I wanted to bring up always helped me use my time effectively. To do this, I put the title of the problem, followed by subheadings with examples of how it’s affecting me, why I thought it was important to bring it up, and any other important points I wanted to add. You can alter this list to suit your needs, but I think even a general one can be helpful. It also means you don’t have to wait another week to tell your therapist if you forget a topic.

3. Find someone you are comfortable with

Therapy is a very vulnerable time for people. You talk about hard subjects, and they can ask difficult questions you might not want to answer. You also just might not click. So, if you don’t feel comfortable/agree with your therapist, don’t be afraid to find someone else. It is your time, your emotions, and your money. By being with someone who helps you feel comfortable and heard, you will make a more open and safe environment.

4. Don't be afraid to cry

Calling girls “dramatic” and boys “unmanly” when they cry has been normalized. But it couldn’t be further from the truth. Tears are necessary for our well-being, they help us to release our stress hormone, cortisol, while also releasing oxytocin and endorphins, which help make us feel good and may also ease both physical and emotional pain. Bringing up tough issues and memories can cause us to cry, and that is nothing to be ashamed or embarrassed about. It is a strength to have, and it can help us to see our feelings and emotions with more clarity.

5. Practice outside of the office

Listening and appreciating the advice and support mechanisms from therapy is one thing, but a good way to see quick and effective treatment is to practice the things you’ve learned whenever you can. If you are finding it tough to remember to implement them, you can try to put a few minutes aside at the end of the day and see when your practices would have been applicable during your everyday tasks and social interactions. This means next time; you will be more likely to think of the methods and apply them.

6. Don’t be afraid to ask questions

Your therapy is for your self-improvement, if you have any questions about a treatment available, what to do about a certain situation, or anything else in between, it is important to ask, there are no stupid questions! Asking questions will not only make sure you're comfortable with and learning from your therapy but also improve your relationship with your therapist.

7. Tell them everything

The best way to get the most out of your therapy is to tell them everything. Your therapist is there to help you. I also know that you might have something to tell them which they will have to report to your parents or your country's child protection agency. Don't be afraid! I was too, but my friend told me to. It was awful and difficult at the moment, but I wouldn't have been able to heal if I hadn't told my therapist.

8. Be patient

Finally, the last thing is to be patient. Starting therapy is starting a journey. It will take time, strength, and help, it is not always easy. But in the end, you will feel happier, calmer, and at peace; whatever you were looking for, than you were when you started. You have got this!

Therapy seems scary, a big word, a big room, with tissues and a professional, asking invasive questions followed by “How does that make you feel?”. While this is the often depiction of it, it is far from the truth. Your therapist wants what is best for you. Talking it out will help your problems seem more manageable and in the long run help you feel better about whatever is holding you down.

If you are looking for immediate support, https://findahelpline.com/ has 100+ countries helpline’s, if your country is not available on the site, you can find it on a search engine by searching “(your country) helplines” and you should find a list of helpful numbers, including helplines which can help you find the appropriate support. I hope this article will help you feel more reassured and ready to choose if therapy is right for you and what you need.