ARE ELECTRIC CARS HARMLESS INDEED?
November 30, 2018
By AnnaCreativeBanana BRONZE, Chelyabinsk, Other

Nowadays, the environmental issue stays acutely as never before. Various sources pollute the atmosphere. One of these sources is an automobile, more precisely, emissions which it generates while working. Gases pollute air, influence climate and account for 50% of noise exposure.

The question is how may we deal with such a serious problem? It is not a surprise that the issue of contaminating atmosphere has always been existing. Humanity, realizing the danger of emissions, has been trying to dispose of them, and, therefore, dispose of cars, producing gases.

Nevertheless, do not think that the replacement of vehicles with the internal combustion engine has led to creating of electric automobile. It has merely led to the increase of their applications. 

In fact, the first electric car was invented before creation of the internal combustion engine. It was a trolley with an electric motor.

Yet manufacturers understood this electric car will not go far, therefore, improvements of an electric vehicle were not long in coming.

The 19th century was the century of developing this kind of transport. Models which could overcome the speed of 100 km/h on the land were worked out. Two electric motors were applied as a source of energy. The progress in the development of the speed characteristic continued, however, another quality of automobiles started to appear. Further, they were capable of overcoming the distance of 167 km without recharging.

Nonetheless, we are aware that cars, running on electricity, are not almost used. What is the reason?

The response is straightforward – at the beginning of the 20th century the fight between an electric car and an internal combustion vehicle commenced. In spite of alike features: almost the equal power and the same speed – the electric automobile had one big disadvantage. The recharge was made by the connection of the car to the electric motor, running on alternating current, which was hard to create.

Due to this drawback, automobiles with the internal combustion engine have taken the leading position.

However, for a short period electric cars restored their fame in the half of the 20th century since there was energetic crisis of fuel of the 70s and one problem, which we currently have, is the ecological problem.  

In the end, electric vehicles were not able to win this severe struggle. The cost of fuel have become available, forcing electric cars to leave ventures for a while.

Yet, have people forgotten the ecological problem? Not at all. Though electric cars by their nature are not capable of creating emissions, one needs energy to recharge the battery, which is produced by power stations. Such stations indeed pollute environment.

In this case, talking about contamination of atmosphere, unfortunately, we do not have an objectively worthwhile solution.