ChatGPT: Changing the World as We Know It with Artificial Intelligences
Lance Nguyen, Staff|June 6, 2023

Asking+ChatGPT+to+write+an+article.+%28Photography+by+Lance+Nguyen%29
Asking ChatGPT to write an article. (Photography by Lance Nguyen)

ChatGPT is an advanced artificial intelligence language model that has taken the world by storm. Developed by OpenAI, it is one of the most powerful language models ever; it can process and generate natural language. Its capabilities go from answering simple questions to writing long pieces of text. In this article, we will explore the features of ChatGPT, how it works, and the impact it has on our society.

ZDNET describes ChatGPT as “a natural language processing tool driven by AI technology that allows you to have human-like conversations and much more with the chatbot. The language model can answer questions and assist you with tasks, such as composing emails, essays, and code.”

With how much ChatGPT is capable of, what do other people think about ChatGPT and its Artificial intelligence? 

Huntington Beach High School (HBHS) sophomore Nicholas Trani said, “It’s similar to Google as it provides answers for homework assignments and knowledge to all people.” 

ChatGPT does indeed provide answers for school assignments, and it is now a rising concern among many teachers across the country. 

Teachers College and Columbia University articulated that ChatGPT has risks and benefits. They say, “[ChatGPT] may help teachers plan lessons and grade papers. But it can also help students cheat and introduces numerous other challenges.”

HBHS English teacher Josh Anderson said, “Most teachers will be doing more in-class assignments now instead of doing assignments online, it will be in person. I think the accuracy is questionable. It could be used for brainstorming but I would never use it or let any of my students use it.”

Although ChatGPT has benefits, students tend to use its abilities to their advantage in order to complete their assignments.


ChatGPT writing out an article. (Photography by Lance Nguyen)
With how it is affecting our education systems, how is ChatGPT going to affect our society as a whole?

According to DigtialGrowth, “some people are worried about the potential for job losses as a result of automation. Others are concerned about the ethical implications of AI…the potential benefits of ChatGPT far outweigh the risks…ChatGPT will play an increasingly important role in shaping the future of communication and technology.” 

Yes, this is true, there are many risks and benefits with ChatGPT, but it depends on the user of it, not the program itself. 

HBHS Freshman Julie Nguyen said, “ChatGPT has a lot of benefits, but I’m scared about jobs people will lose and how heavily kids will use it for homework.”

Unfortunately, ChatGPT and other AI bots might have the potential to eliminate jobs and kids won’t be able to learn properly because they might be searching everything up. 

As an advanced language model, ChatGPT has both positive and negative aspects. On the positive end, ChatGPT can generate responses that mimic those of real people, providing helpful advice and knowledge on a variety of subjects. Also, ChatGPT can be a helpful tool for learning, research, and professional uses giving users access to a wealth of information. It’s vital to recognize ChatGPT’s limitations. The model rarely outputs false or deceptive data making it a simple and efficient way for users to gain information.

People must use critical thinking skills and validate the data they receive via ChatGPT. The user has to pair ChatGPT’s benefits with human discretion in order to maximize its potential.