Hot Classrooms: Students Struggle to Learn Amid Heat Waves, Lack of AC
Miseducation is a column that chronicles what it’s like to be a student in the modern United States.
BY MARY RETTA
AUGUST 23, 2022
Desks and chairs arranged in classroom at high school
MASKOT
Molly Mus, a physics and biology teacher at a Boston public school, says she has been dealing with boiling temperatures in her classroom the last few years — and not just because of her students’ science experiments. Mus’s school building has no ventilation. So her classroom, which has no central air or ceiling fan, has felt scorching due to recent unprecedented heat waves in the area. The district is asking teachers to keep their windows open to mitigate the spread of COVID, but when Mus put a box fan in her classroom window, she says it simply blew hot air around the room.

“Honestly, some students simply do not come to class at all once it starts getting unbearable in the school building,” Mus told Teen Vogue. “Attendance drops dramatically once our building gets hot, and being on the top floor with no air-conditioning is not enticing to anyone wanting to learn science.”

Like Mus, many students and teachers across the United States have had their classroom experience interrupted by increasingly intense heat waves. The ongoing climate crisis has raised temperatures across the globe, and environmental experts predict it’s only going to get hotter. According to 2021 data from the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 9 of the top 10 warmest years on record in the contiguous 48 states have occurred since 1998, and the number of heat waves, defined as multiday extreme heat events, has increased in frequency and duration in the U.S. since the 2000s.

TRENDING NOW

Why Rep. Ayanna Pressley, Storm Reid, and Other Youth Activists are Urging People to Vote for Biden


This extreme heat has had a detrimental impact on students’ ability to learn. In the last year alone, schools in Baltimore, Philadelphia, Detroit, and other cities have sent students home from school early in recognition that teaching and learning in such intense heat is virtually impossible. Notably, many of these schools closed due to heat waves in May, before summer was even in full swing — another indicator that we’re experiencing unbearably hot temperatures for longer stretches of the year than we used to.

While heat waves are affecting many parts of the country, experts say that school buildings in northern states are among the least prepared. According to Joseph Allen, an associate professor and director of the healthy buildings programs at Harvard School of Public Health, this is because schools up north, where it’s historically been cooler, were originally designed to retain heat and often don’t have AC units built in.

“For traditionally cold climates, like in the Northeast, it makes sense to design buildings that retain heat,” Allen said. “But with the changing climate, we’re seeing heat waves starting earlier in the year and lasting longer — they’re impacting schools in May, June, and September. And because a lot of these buildings don’t have AC, it can create what I call ‘indoor heat waves:’ Even when the heat dissipates outdoors, the temperature in the classroom can still be very high because the buildings start to release all that absorbed heat and energy.”

Research shows that extreme heat has a detrimental impact on students’ academic performance. A 2017 study from Harvard University found that the odds of a student failing a test on a day where temperatures are hotter than 90 degrees was 12% higher than if the test was taken on a 72-degree day. Further data from the American Economic Association shows that test scores are even lower when there are consecutive days of extreme heat.

Though all students and teachers are affected by extreme heat, not everyone is affected equally. Students at schools in lower-income areas, where there is more likely to be overcrowding in classrooms, will feel the effects of the heat more broadly, as it will be combined with excess body heat. Students who live on campus may also be more impacted by extreme heat, as they not only have to study in buildings without central AC, but live in them full time as well. Last June, students at Brown University noted difficulty sleeping and concentrating in class during nearly 100-degree weather in Rhode Island. (Administrators told the Brown Daily Herald that the electrical infrastructure of the campus’s dorms couldn’t support the “widespread use” of portable AC units, but that they took other measures to address to heat, including holding an event where “ice pops, cooler bags, water bottles, and reusable straws were handed out to students.”)

Many disabled students are also more vulnerable to extreme heat at school. Julia Métraux, a graduate student at UC Berkeley, told Teen Vogue that almost none of her classrooms have had AC, and due to her vasculitis, the high temperatures in California have caused her skin to break out in painful hives, which impedes her concentration in class.

“Disabled people are very much harmed by the climate crisis, and many are already being displaced and are dying,” Métraux told Teen Vogue. “People with heat-sensitive conditions need AC, and with temperatures going all over the place, we need to be able to regulate the temperatures around us, so we don’t get sick.”

In an email to Teen Vogue, a UC Berkeley spokesperson said that many of the buildings don’t have AC because of the “moderate climate” of the area and “because of our concern with energy efficiency and the environment.” The spokesperson said that the school’s Disabled Students’ Program “works closely with disabled students through the interactive process to determine what barriers students might face in the classroom,” and, “when there is truly an access issue for a DSP student, we would move the classroom to a cooler building or one that has air-conditioning.”

With such unpredictable weather, the presence of AC is becoming a critical factor in whether or not a student can properly learn on a hot day. A June 2022 mandate from Philadelphia public schools stated that, on days above 90 degrees, the city will close its approximately 100 school buildings without proper AC and ask students to learn remotely that day instead. According to Allen, getting ACs into every school building is a crucial step in ensuring that students have equal learning opportunities no matter what the weather is like.

Most Popular
Teen VogueWhat We Know About the Trump Rally Shooting
Politics
What We Know About the Trump Rally Shooting
BY ASHLEIGH CARTER, TEEN VOGUE
Teen VogueDonald Trump “Safe” After Apparent Attack at Pennsylvania Rally
Politics
Donald Trump “Safe” After Apparent Attack at Pennsylvania Rally
BY EVE BATEY, TEEN VOGUE
Zendaya Went Full "Challengers" in Ralph Lauren Outfit at Wimbledon
Style
Zendaya Went Full "Challengers" in Ralph Lauren Outfit at Wimbledon
BY ASHLEIGH CARTER
“There needs to be real infrastructure improvements in school buildings across the country. I really don’t see any way around that,” Allen said. “And what’s exciting is that the solutions are out there now where you can get central air while using very little fossil fuels, and provide heating and cooling in bigger buildings in a way that’s still highly energy-efficient. As we move towards a greener grid and the Electrify Everything movement gains steam, air-conditioning schools doesn’t have to be harmful to our climate goals.”

Mus said her school district’s general contractors are starting to install window air conditioner units in some Boston public schools. Her new high school has them, which she called a “step in the right direction for student learning and teacher working conditions.”

But Mus knows many students and teachers across the country are still doing their best in truly unfavorable classroom conditions. “I think that students, parents, and community members should know that students cannot learn in extreme cold or heat; just think about Maslow’s hierarchy [of needs],” Mus said. “If basic needs are not being met, humans suffer along with the ability to learn something new.”