World News That Teens Should Know: an Unbiased Overview of What's Happening in Israel and Palestine
POLITICS
 Sat, June 01

 BY AINE MACSWEENEY
 0

On October 7th, 2023, Hamas, a Palestinian militant group, invaded Israel in Operation al-Aqsa Flood with the use of 3,000 soldiers, several thousand bombs, and more weapons. The Hamas killed 1,139 Israelis and foreign nationals, including 766 civilians and 373 security personnel. 252 other people were taken captive in the Gaza Strip.

In rebellion, Israel launched one of the most devastating attacks in modern history on Palestinian territory, named Operation Iron Swords. On October 27, they launched a massive ground invasion to overthrow Hamas and free its hostages.

More than 36,000 Palestinians have died in Gaza since the Israeli operation began. Ten thousand more are thought to be buried beneath debris and are missing. The 2.3 million Palestinians who resided in the Gaza Strip have been forced to relocate almost completely, and over 100,000 Israelis are still internally displaced.

The Long War-Torn History of Israel and Palestine
This long conflict has roots as far back as the late 19th century. Some of the main points of conflict include the Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip, the status of Jerusalem and land battles, Israeli settlements, borders, security, water rights, the permit regime, Palestinian freedom of movement, and the Palestinian right of return.

Since 1967, Israel has been in control of the Gaza Strip and West Bank. This military operation has brought international attention to the gross human rights violations committed by Israelis against Palestinians.

Various attempts have been made to resolve the conflict as part of the Israeli–Palestinian peace process, alongside efforts to resolve the broader Arab–Israeli conflict, but these attempts have been suppressed.

If you would like to learn more about their tense history, here are some reliable, unbiased articles to read:

article from BBC NEWS
article from CFR.org
article from Aljazeera.com
article from ABC news

Hrkac from Wikimedia Commons

What Has Happened Since October 27th?
On 17 October, Israel bombed in areas of southern Gaza. Ministry of Health officials in Gaza reported heavy overnight bombing, killing over 70 people, including families who had evacuated from Gaza City in the north. In the afternoon, an Israeli strike hit a UNRWA school in the Al-Maghazi refugee camp, killing six and injuring 12.

Late in the evening, an explosion occurred in the parking lot of the Al-Ahli Arabi Baptist Hospital in the center of Gaza City, killing hundreds.

The IDF began a massive, multi-pronged ground intrusion into sections of northern Gaza on October 27.

Israel bombed a six-story apartment complex in central Gaza on October 31, killing at least 106 civilians, 54 of whom were children.

The fighting persisted until the middle of November, and on November 18, Israeli strikes in the Jabalia refugee camp claimed the lives of over 80 people. A temporary ceasefire agreement between Israel and Hamas was reached on November 22. It stipulated a four-day "pause” in hostilities to allow for the release of fifty hostages in Gaza.

Between November 24 and 30, Israel released prisoners, and Hamas released hostages. On November 27, Qatar declared that Israel and Hamas had reached a deal to prolong the ceasefire by two days.

The beginning of January 2024, following the announcement of almost 23,000 Palestinian fatalities. Israel declared that it would be implementing a more centered strategy going forward.

The average daily death toll by the end of January was less than one-third of what it had been in October, but it was still more than three times higher than the 2014 conflict.

Israel arrested 150 men in the Gaza Strip on December 7 and detained dozens more on December 10. Images and videos of "men sitting or kneeling on the ground, stripped down to their pants, with some bound and blindfolded" appeared on social media. The Guardian reported that the people seen in the images were civilians, among them a journalist.

Israel began its bombing campaign on Rafah on February 12.

Benny Gantz, a member of the Israeli war cabinet, issued a warning on February 18 that if Hamas has not released all hostages by March 10, a ground operation will begin in Rafah.

At least 118 Palestinians were killed and 760 injured in the flour massacre that took place in the Gaza Strip on February 29, 2024, when Israeli forces opened fire on them as they were attempting to get food from aid trucks in Gaza City.

On May 6th, The Israeli military issued an evacuation order for residents of eastern Rafah.

Hamas declared that it had agreed to the terms of the ceasefire that Qatar and Egypt had organized. A six-week ceasefire and prisoner exchange were part of the agreement. But Israel turned down this agreement. Hamas's accepted terms, Israel stated, were "far from Israel's basic requirements."

The Israeli military took over the Gaza side of the Rafah Crossing, which borders Egypt, on May 7.

The International Court of Justice ruled on May 24 that Israel must immediately cease its military offensive in Rafah. The United Nations reported on May 24 that only 906 aid truckloads had reached Gaza since Israel's Rafah operation began.

For the first time in several months, Hamas launched an uproar of rockets towards Central Israel on May 26. At least 45 people were killed when Israel bombed the Tel al-Sultan displacement camp in Rafah, an area designated by Israel as a safe zone. One Egyptian soldier was killed in a confrontation between Israeli and Egyptian forces at the Gaza border because of the bombing.

The Al-Mawasi refugee camp, another designated civilian evacuation zone, was bombed less than 48 hours after the Tel al-Sultan massacre, killing at least 21 people, despite international outcry and calls from government officials around the world to halt its Rafah offensive. The IDF denied taking part in the assault.

This is only the beginning. We cannot even begin to comprehend the fear and destitution going on in Palestine and Israel.



Şeyma D. from Pexels

This conflict is ongoing, with innocent people getting caught in the crossfire. The current death toll is over 36,000, and we cannot be complacent.